Another sprawling masterwork from a genius of modern cinema, but I personally could do without that nagging feeling. Not that this came at a bad time, though: now seems like a great time for a didactic caution about colonialism. It's impossible to overstate how powerfully this opens, with a full first act that makes all its accusations visually. A swirling mass of images, some old, some new, surround a culture in its death throes, the vicious eyes of hungry scavengers peeking through the miasma on occasion to make their intentions clear. Soulless colonists circle around the Osage, speaking of them in the same way you would talk about a kitchen appliance, purely in terms of longevity and usefulness. They do this as brazenly as anything else, the concept of monopoly over other peoples' lives being about as mundane as small talk regarding the weather.

For 2 straight hours, we watch as impatience takes over, and simply speaking about human beings as animals becomes insufficient for dehumanizing them. The killings alluded to at the start become the active plot, and our reprehensible protagonist, Ernest, lets complicity in manifest destiny give way to personal involvement, in the form of clandestine conspiracy. His subterfuge against his wife, who is related to the people whose blood is on his hands, is aided by his uncle, who is far and away Scorsese's most malevolent creation. It's often unclear how much the two of them really believe in the delusion that what they're doing has any reasonable justification, but their greed precedes them anyway.

The final act of the movie includes a trial for them that's all smoke and mirrors. They shed crocodile tears for the crimes they've committed and the tragic circumstances that have surrounded them, but it doesn't even matter if they're real. No pangs of remorse can bring back the civilization they butchered to get rich, and the true main character, Molly, who has paid for her trusting nature by losing everyone she's ever loved, simply withdraws from her own life entirely. No consequences will ever come to these men, among them her own husband, who himself betrayed her trust by attempting to covertly exterminate her as well, and then lying about it.

Obviously, this is Scorsese's most vindictive movie by a mile. Complicity in colonial genocide is much the same as genocide itself, and nobody's hands were tied here. What was done to the Osage, and indeed all the Native people of the colonized world, was forwardly murder, for which only meager shrugs and apologies have ever been offered. The respect for their tribe is the most eminent thematic idea in the entire piece, and every single scene including traditional, natural imagery is just overwhelming.

Scorsese sacrifices his own sense of control here in order to make this respect more obvious, and damning, which has its upsides and downsides. It's the kind of sincerity that you can't buy, and with a movie of this scale and prestige, it's amazing that it manages to feel like it has this much weight. Of course, a lot of that weight comes from the utterly unimpeachable visuals, the likes of which are unlike anything Scorsese has done before. The scene with the fire on the ranch, in particular, contains some of his best work, bar none.

It's a wonder then, since so much of this movie already serves to point such a finger, that it seems to bungle itself so much toward the end. It's trying to have its token courtroom drama that it immediately apologizes for anyway. I don't dislike any of this, and I totally believe in Scorsese's vision, but it feels strange to end on such a brash, gimmicky note (with Jack White included for some reason,) when it seemed like we were getting at the whole "making this into true crime is cheap" schtick. Does this not feel gimmicky itself, when it diverts its massive, singular emotivity into a typical white man's drama?

I suppose that's the point, and I wouldn't say I "disagree" with it. There's no way to make this and not have it be a little hypocritical. It's all got a tight seal on it, but it does feel unnecessary and even masturbatory toward the end. We understand that this is important to you, Marty, you made a whole movie about it! He shows up himself to deliver the final blow regarding the story's futility, which I suppose is fitting, but does still rub me a bit the wrong way. Who exactly are we pointing the fingers at here, ourselves? Is this the first time we're supposed to have heard about native genocide?

Given how much I've already written, I don't want to get into the nitty-gritty too much, or make it seem like the message is unimportant. Scorsese himself has even said that he doesn't either, seeing this less as a piece with a specific technique, but a kind of threnody for a now-downtrodden people outside his own style: that much is obvious. The cast is huge, and loaded to the teeth with all-time talent, but our 3 leads dominate the show as flagbearers for the movie's central criticism.

De Niro, still managing to be at his most energetically unlikeable and duplicitous, even in his twilight; DiCaprio, giving his all to a truly disgusting performance as a self-deluded fascist, the kind I didn't think he had in him; and Gladstone, who shines here as the most heartbroken, crestfallen woman perhaps ever put to film, facing constant grief and robbery with resigned emptiness. The movie is about her, for sure, and even though we get robbed a bit of her depth by keeping her bedridden, there's no way around the fact that she's a perfect representative for an agonized people.

This is incredible, but it does waver at a few points. I hesitate to call it "indulgent," both because of Scorsese's immense power as a filmmaker and because of his correct assertion that this is a story that demands telling. I'm not sure if I like this cadence as much as his last gigantic, old-man swan song, but it has a head on its shoulders that you don't see too often, and I applaud it for that with everything I've got. There are at least 3 hours of a visionary at his apex here, and I think it's a superb competitor among all the enormous historical epics of 2023. Lithgow and Fraser are perfect.