In the right headspace for feudal Japanese stuff, this seems to be perfect for translating the superstitions of the ailing peasantry into the neologisms of a new decade for Japanese cinema. As the aristocracy cannibalize each other, the laborers are fed the scraps. The coming of a new shogun means essentially nothing to the legions of serfs in the fields, so destitute that they reduce themselves to their most animal instincts to survive. Cultured men wearing clan emblems stumble into the reeds as refugees, where filthy scavengers wait against the backgrounds of centuries past to hurl their worthless bodies into the same pit their ancestors once fell into. The imagery is beyond powerful, and the masterful sound design (for 1960!) of the whistling reeds makes this haunting in a different way than most horror movies, in that it seems completely cold, rather than forwardly scary.

The notion of time's cruel passing is only one of the ways this movie is upsetting though, because the actual plot is much more personal. The inversion of Japan's unique and beautiful attitude toward spirituality is only the backdrop for the melodrama of our craven characters. While they all kill and rob the dying just to survive, the Onibaba herself is the one of the three who really carries the malice that the visuals imply. Her daughter-in-law and her skivy boyfriend (who looks like Japanese Rob McElhenney,) may seem to be carelessly indulging themselves, but is it not a sort of karmic retribution to bring joy into a place where there's usually only death? The Onibaba, a jealous, repressed freak, seems to believe that she can be the one to decide whether their actions are righteous or not, that belief being the cover for her own desperate loneliness.

It's that desperation which drives her to connive her young companions into terror and misfortune, not unlike the samurai who she condemns for doing the same thing on the battlefield. The Oni mask passing between those two is one of my favourite touches, because it represents both the literal hypocrisy of the Onibaba, but also the climax of the underlying motif of karma. I felt a lot of similarities here to Persona (1966), being that it's an austere, upsetting movie from the 60s about sexual repression--this feels a lot more spiritual than anything else I've ever seen, though. It certainly doesn't have so much dialogue, and it's definitely less visually transgressive.

No, this generally sets out to be more reserved and desolate, allowing space in-between the brief bursts of energy. Like I said, the shooting is impeccable--I love every scene with Ushi, where stolen weapons from dead soldiers are fenced inside a cave older than mankind, containing an ancient Buddha carving that nobody even seems to notice. Maybe the real folly of pride here is that these people only seem to invoke the idea of religion when they feel that it's advantageous. Ashikaga Shogunate critique of neoconservatism? More likely than you think.

It's hard to say that there's much of a "point" here, though. I feel like it's less direct than that, mostly just serving to highlight the misery of the feudal proletariat. When all the worst impulses of the ruling class trickle down into the poor who have barely experienced their own nation's culture in centuries, beyond the soldiers' corpses they find in the dirt. A lot of dead bodies being dragged, and gross meat on sticks being gnawed on. Actually, what was that normal-looking beagle doing out in the reeds anyway? And why did they eat it?