The original butchered masterpiece. So ambitious and ahead of its time that even the compromised, disavowed failure we have now is a priceless work of genius. 

The significantly abbreviated length takes away from a lot of the worldview that would otherwise drive this forward; what details remain are still completely remarkable. The anachronisms, for example, of the characters all being 1890s accurate yet existing in a modern California. Or the colors that respond to the actions on screen and trace certain objects of the characters' focus. Even the insistent, on-location shooting that was mostly unheard of at the time. These things, in a massive, 10-hour odyssey as intended, would have constructed a world so vivid and real around our players that the naturalistic acting (again, unheard of in a silent, but it's there,) that their moments of weakness would've torn straight through the audience. Shearing this down into only the most intense or literal parts gives us something not bad by any means, but a lot more cynical and vaudeville-y than I think it was meant to be. Stroheim intended for this to be a gutwrenching epic on par with the literature it's based on, emotive and undeniable in its size and form.

Compare this to some of his contemporaries, and you can see how insane and unique his vision is. Murnau's The Last Laugh came out this same year, and you can see how differently they shoot the same things. A wedding for Murnau is a series of intricate, decadent sets, rife with lofty symbolism and interspersed with nightmarish montages. People are interlopers in an unreal space--it's uneasy, and building up to some sort of tipping point. Stroheim's wedding is decadent in a different way. It's far less spacious, and the takes are much longer. As many people are crammed into the mediums as possible, kept in sharp enough focus to obsess over their mannerisms as a familiar scene plays out in a recognizable location. The only interlopers in the scene are those of a funeral seen from a window--a macabre juxtaposition that implies a serious, knowing dread. You know from the start that there are repressed, basal instincts churning around under a sea of nervous tics. In a way of speaking, the people are the subjects rather than the objects.

Stroheim uses this humanistic approach to create scenarios driven by "base instincts" rather than commentaries. Murnau again shoots poverty much differently, as a sympathetic affliction on an otherwise virtuous person. Stroheim is more interested in the emotivity itself, and how different facets of our personalities present in different environments. This is where his shooting on location comes into play, foregoing the idea of deliberate or manicured sets in order to drag something real out of his characters. Sometimes this crosses the line of acting, driving his players to the bounds of their willingness to participate, and even including some civilians in his shooting. As different as he is from Murnau, this does warrant obvious comparisons to Vertov, from whom he is primarily different in his sense of pace. Vertov's frenetic editing and sharp contrasts give the impression of candidness and voyeurism (that's being really threadbare for Vertov analysis, but I'm trying to keep the comparison meaningful,) while Stroheim aims for something more methodical. This is grey, quiet, and still, and even at barely a quarter of its intended length it's deeply engrossing, if occasionally dull. 

To use a favorite Filipe Furtado-ism, Stroheim "erases the distance" between characters on the screen and our own feelings about their situations. From the first scenes it is easy to be overwhelmed by the honesty, and the subtle sense of humor. Again, after studio butchering, some of the details that were intended to be recurring, infective fixtures of auteur style now feel a little counterproductive to these aims. The anachronistic setting, for example, seems almost intended as some kind of Brechtian alienation technique, designed to break a spell of "immersion" on a viewer who notices it. In a longer movie, you could see it serving as another Kino-Pravda tool of erasing that distance between the events of the movie and the world they're in, but only being noticeable in some instances makes it feel bizarre. The handful of grotesque dream sequences as well: these are infrequent in the existing version, and seem like disturbing (if fascinating, individually,) detours from a theme we already sort of understand.

What is left of this is beyond brilliant, and a genuine Rosetta Stone for cinema. The ending is beautiful and indescribable, even if the rapid stampede toward it feels almost silly to see today. The white whale of this movie's full cut is a worthy chase that I too would love to see, because Stroheim's uncompromising personality and empathy seem to be misrepresented in what remains of his master thesis. It's possible that the first actor-director of American film was its greatest and most honest. This film is that hypothesis's most undeniable proof. This is a film that has a legitimate claim to some of the greatest photography in the history of the medium, and my favorite part might still be the writing. In a movie with no spoken words! The intertitles for the Trina's Austrian mother being intentionally written in pidgin to imitate Stroheim's own hazy, self-critical recollection of his own mother tongue, which he reportedly couldn't speak very well. Nobody else ever did this kind of stuff!