A beautiful behemoth, more or less impossible to navigate by any conventional means, a final answer to Art Deco, some of the most enduring and unbelievable visuals ever put to film--it's a little overambitious though. The distributors certainly thought so when they lost 50 bajillion dollars on it, but that's not entirely the fault of the movie. Unlike a lot of film's great money pits, this one is directed by Fritz Lang, so it doesn't waste a second. All the space is economized and deployed exactly when necessary, with sets bigger and more elaborate than anything previously imagined being used for all of 10 seconds. 10 perfect seconds, that convey so much intensity it makes you want to weep. So many of cinema's most beloved images were simply invented off the cuff here, and a few snazzy editing techniques were too.

It's just overambitious in screenwriting terms. This is a film that can't be too overstated, but it does somehow manage to drag occasionally. I watched the most recent Kino Lorber rebuild, which is an incredible, brilliant feat of restoration in itself. With all the refurbishment, it's a little difficult to imagine some of the pieces still missing would be able to add much meaning to something so convoluted. Don't get me wrong, the individual tableaux aren't impossible to decipher on their own, but there's just so much to keep track of: the scale is enormous. That works to great effect when we watch some of the more insane things, like brass androids being transmogrified into the beasts of the sea by mad scientists, but a little less so when we randomly remember that were supposed to be Marxists.

Lang is a genius though, no question, and everything negative you could possibly say about this is a nitpick in the face of it's enormity. It's funny when we get all the way to end and the movie turns out to have been about Lasallism the whole time, but I only got that feeling because the previous two and a half hours were like receiving premonitions from the Demiurge. The scene in the lab is the most famous one, but the scene where we watch the "heart machine" collapse is one of the most captivating images of destruction ever filmed. I also loved that whole nightmare sequence where the reaper comes to life--insane montage that would rival even The Last Laugh (1924).

It's an underrated achievement as well that this movie makes biblical allegory feel so powerful, especially when it's so explicit. The book of Revelations is actually given the weight of a horrific, apocalyptic story here, it translates perfectly into the pale-faced, wide-eyed language of German expressionism. Once this hits the "Intermezzo" portion, it just takes off running: the Whore of Babylon, literal and metaphorical in this case, commanding an angry throng to pry open Ishtar's Gate, where a monument to Moloch powers a garden of earthly delights above. An unfinished Tower of Babel sitting in ruins in the imaginations of a worthless ruling class. Patriarchs that must be rescued from their own hubris by their sons. These inversions of biblical allusions end up being perfect analogues for an industrial society rapidly conjuring up its own armageddon, no Dragon of Egypt required.

It's pretty compelling stuff to look at, no two ways about it. Pretty pompous to say that something that basically invented most kinds of editing could've done with a bit of an edit, but this has been endlessly tortured for a century. Cut to shreds by studios when it was new, then locked away and badly copied for decades. What we have now is still an obvious masterpiece, and it's one of those historical documents that's just as much fun to read about as it is to watch. Even still, every second ends up being worthwhile. That scene with the flood is a little long, but you aren't gonna nuke your 5 million dollar set on camera and not make people watch.