I think I tend to prefer the Jidaigeki of Kurosawa's later period, but this really surprised me with the space control. Mifune is on fire as the bloodthirsty protagonist, but his typical swagger is replaced by desperate apprehension, and the swashbuckling adventure around him is instead a silent, infernal descent into ambitious delusion. All the Kurosawa tricks are here in full regalia--my favorite of which being how weirdly smoky everything is--except it's occasionally scaled back to allow the stilted melodrama to breathe. As a Shakespeare adaptation, it succeeds in that regard better than anything I've ever seen, in that it takes the deathly-serious approach to Shakespeare without making it seem stuffy or overwrought.

Not that it's a straight-up adaptation of Macbeth though, which is a huge component of its success. It's really my favorite kind of adaptation, in which only the general plot beats are retained and all the details are filled in with the stylistic hallmarks of the director. There's Macbeth, and Lady Macbeth, and a "witch," and it's "about" betraying everyone around you to gain power through paranoia. That's about where the similarities end: Kurosawa makes full use of the rich setting to craft a new kind of unsettling aura enveloping the violence endemic to the plot. Bushido seems like the perfect breeding ground for a story about pride goeth-ing before the fall, and the inclusion of weird Noh theatre asides makes for what I can only assume is the first of a few perfect swings at recontextualizing Shakespeare into Japanese culture.

Few can say that things like this come naturally to them, but Kurosawa was just that guy. This seems less plodding than a lot of his work that I've seen, choosing instead to be a little more intense and sometimes just plain vicious. A scene late in the story involves our hero, delirious with rage and smitten by guilt, riding into the forest to be accosted by yokai, egging him on to butcher his enemies in an upcoming siege. The whole thing is like a nightmare--Mifune is in the center, on horseback, turning around repeatedly as different spirits appear to him, dressed as various eras' great slaughterers, fading in behind him with malicious laughter. All the while, he desperately tries to play off his anxiety with forced, deranged laughter, and the inevitability of his death in combat is more or less sealed.

It's all very old-school and melodramatic, but it's honest in every possible way. The imagery is beyond compare. It carries the energy of black magic, which is only a small component of Macbeth, but here becomes the entire lifeblood. The curse of ambition is immortalized in blind willingness to act on the impulses of yokai; we often only see what we want to see from our history. Washizu only gets out of his encounters in the woods what he already believes, which leads him to ruin. Is this not how many people treat the abstract in the world, as an excuse to do in the concrete what they already intended to? And then have some kind of scapegoat for when things turn out poorly? I believe there are about 5 trillion Chinese novels about that topic that were all written before the advent of Christ, so I probably have some reading to do about the ancestors and their very strange-looking dogs.

This feels less imposingly large than many other Kurosawas, but no less stylish. Much to think about here, and much to look at. Upsetting and sometimes completely ethereal, but ends up feeling very personal, and tragic. Every time I do my Kurosawa homework I always come out loving it, and I can't believe there was ever a time when he struggled to get funding for his movies.