How was this possible? Shooting straight up into the sky, but it still seems dark. It's hard to believe that Dreyer was repeatedly met with derision in his time, because his deific control of the space within his frame is something that we now realize hasn't been replicated in a literal century of trying. How could a man fully understand the utility of these long, naturalistic takes, but also work in dreamlike "trick film" effects that feel 100% honest, and furthermore mortifying? This is both Lumière and Méliès, synthesizing competing attitudes about realism and fantasy into one nonsensical package that keeps you guessing at all times. Not about the "content," which is surprisingly straight forward, and notably doesn't include any actual images of what we would now consider vampires. No, what we are guessing at is the veracity of the world presented: the interiors expand and contract inside these flowing, tracking shots, while exteriors are fuzzy, washed-out, and populated entirely by double-exposure ghosts.

There isn't a single instance in this that feels precisely like reality, but under scrutiny, reality is always pretty faithfully portrayed. Taking in the full breadth of a creepy little room gives us a good sense of a familiar, claustrophobic situation. This is then poisoned by macabre, incomprehensible interlopers with suspicious intentions. We see only as much of reality as is necessary for Dreyer to generate a sense of unease by invading it with his abstractions: in other words, it is real, but "unimportant details have been removed." Dreyer himself claimed that as a stated goal in the development of his style, curiously around the same time Bazin began to write some of his most enduring work. The approach to realism in film was already the subject of much debate by then, and as much as Dreyer purported to be against it to an extent ("it is a waste of time to copy photography,") watching films like this, even among his early work, proves that he understood the role of realistic techniques.

Some of what he said as time went on can be read as a sort of reaction to the fetishism of realistic cinema, calling it "boring," but see how he uses it in Vampyr. The frame is largely intended as real, but with small details making us doubt ourselves. The "interlopers" I described earlier aren't always so literal; early scenes use the perspective of the protagonist seeing things through small windows, or at odd angles, where recognizable space is ordinary save for inconsistent shadows, strange noises in the distance, or glimpses of occult iconography. Given the perspective we're shooting from, we can doubt what we see as much as our characters can, and lush, deep focus close-ups illustrate that doubt as candidly as any of the dense, expository intertitles do. In a sense, Dreyer is doing exactly what he would later describe as "using the camera to drive away the camera." Try to find a point of view and capture the space before it, but the point of view itself is an element in a composition, so we must imagine ourselves in it fully.

This is similar to Hitchcock's method, but there are variations in the approaches should you make the comparison. Hitchcock emphasized his various points of view as vectors for containing kinks, intrigue, and suspense, almost as if the viewer is being let inside of something they can or want to understand. Dreyer boxes us out completely: the film is a self-contained "harmony," and we must treat it as an abstraction which contains the spiritual ideals of the creator. Brecht's methods are being used to generate almost an antithesis to Brecht's ideals, where a piece of art is a construction of one man's imagination that is best taken sans politics, context, or pre-conception. We take reality in, and spit ideation out.

Dreyer's reckoning of art as being "spiritually interpreted" (a borrowing from author Johannes V. Jensen) is the key to understanding Vampyr. The kind of daytime, fever dream imitation of life that people like Lynch spent decades attempting to recreate. Seldom has it ever been so squarely and richly rendered as it is here, a movie that everyone somehow hated when it first came out. Again, that boggles the mind when every decision here is so clearly remarkable and new, even the things that were done out of necessity like the terse, simplistic dialogue and the civilian acting. The entire sequence when the protagonist splits into a ghost and sees himself dying? Put that in the hall of fame, everyone ever has been trying to do shit like that.

This was Begotten before Begotten was Begotten. Dreyer is one of film's most astute, articulate, and regimented directors, with a strong sense of ideals and the knowhow to put them into practice. Even ignoring all of that, this is still a Halloween classic, if for no other reason than the fact that it's actually creepy and upsetting. The image of the dead man's face flashing behind the window toward the end is a pantheon image in cinema, no doubt in my mind.